== lru-cache

[[toc:]]

=== Description

An LRU (least recently used) cache for Chicken Scheme 5.

Keys and values may be of any type. The cache uses a hash table for O(1)
lookup and a doubly-linked list to maintain access ordering. When the
cache reaches capacity, the least recently used entry is evicted.

This implementation shares no lineage with the
[[/eggref/4/lru-cache|lru-cache egg]], for Chicken Scheme 4, by Jim
Ursetto.

=== Author

Christopher Harrison ([[https://tweag.io|Tweag]])

=== Repository

[[https://github.com/tweag/lru-cache]]

=== Requirements

* [[/egg/srfi-69|srfi-69]]
* [[/egg/matchable|matchable]]

=== API

==== Cache creation

<procedure>(make-lru-cache [capacity])</procedure>

Create a new LRU cache. {{capacity}} is the maximum number of entries
the cache will hold before evicting the least recently used entry;
defaulting to 64.

==== Lookup and mutation

<procedure>(lru-cache-ref cache key)</procedure>

Returns the value associated with {{key}} in {{cache}}, promoting it to
the most recently used position. Signals an error if {{key}} is not
present.

<procedure>(lru-cache-ref cache key thunk)</procedure>

Returns the value associated with {{key}} in {{cache}} if present,
promoting it to the most recently used position. If {{key}} is not
present, calls {{thunk}} (a procedure of zero arguments) to compute the
value, caches the result and returns it.

<procedure>(lru-cache-set! cache key value)</procedure>

Associates {{key}} with {{value}} in {{cache}}. If {{key}} already
exists, updates its value and promotes it to the most recently used
position. If {{key}} is new and the cache is at capacity, the least
recently used entry is evicted.

<procedure>(lru-cache-delete! cache key)</procedure>

Removes the entry for {{key}} from {{cache}}. Signals an error if
{{key}} is not present.

<procedure>(lru-cache-clear! cache)</procedure>

Removes all entries from {{cache}}.

==== Inspection

<procedure>(lru-cache-size cache)</procedure>

Returns the number of entries currently in {{cache}}.

<procedure>(lru-cache-capacity cache)</procedure>

Returns the maximum number of entries {{cache}} can hold.

<procedure>(lru-cache-has-key? cache key)</procedure>

Returns {{#t}} if {{key}} is present in {{cache}}, {{#f}} otherwise.
Does not affect the access ordering.

==== Iteration

<procedure>(lru-cache-for-each cache proc)</procedure>

Apply {{proc}} (a procedure of two arguments: the entry key and value,
respectively) to each entry in {{cache}}, ordered from most recently
used to least recently used. Does not affect the access ordering.

'''Note:''' {{proc}} must not mutate {{cache}}.

<procedure>(lru-cache-fold cache proc init)</procedure>

Calls {{proc}} (a procedure of three arguments: the entry key, value and
accumulator, respectively) with each entry in {{cache}}, ordered from
most recently to least recently used; the initial folded value is
{{init}}, returns the final folded value. Does not affect the access
ordering.

'''Note:''' {{proc}} must not mutate {{cache}}.

<procedure>(lru-cache->alist cache)</procedure>

Returns an association list of all key-value pairs in {{cache}}, ordered
from most recently used to least recently used. Does not affect the
access ordering.

<procedure>(lru-cache-keys cache)</procedure>

Returns a list of all keys in {{cache}}, ordered from most recently used
to least recently used. Does not affect the access ordering.

<procedure>(lru-cache-values cache)</procedure>

Returns a list of all values in {{cache}}, ordered from most recently
used to least recently used. Does not affect the access ordering.

==== Memoisation

<syntax>(define-memoised/lru [capacity] (name arg ...) body ...)</syntax>

Defines a top-level procedure {{name}}, with its argument list and
body definition per usual, but return values are cached based on the
arguments (compared as a list). {{capacity}} defaults to 64.

<procedure>(memoise/lru proc [capacity])</procedure>

Returns a new procedure that caches the results of calling {{proc}}.
Arguments are used as the cache key (compared as a list). {{capacity}}
defaults to 64.

'''Note:''' For recursive procedures, the memoised version must replace
the original binding for recursive calls to benefit from caching. It is
better to use {{define-memoised/lru}} in such cases, wherever possible.

<enscript highlight="scheme">
(define (fib n)
  (cond
    ((= n 0) 1)
    ((= n 1) 1)
    (else (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2))))))

(set! fib (memoise/lru fib))
</enscript>

=== Examples

<enscript highlight="scheme">
(import lru-cache
        (chicken format))

;; Create a cache with capacity 3
(define cache (make-lru-cache 3))

;; Add some entries
(lru-cache-set! cache 'a 1)
(lru-cache-set! cache 'b 2)
(lru-cache-set! cache 'c 3)

(lru-cache-keys cache)  ; => (c b a)

;; Accessing an entry promotes it
(lru-cache-ref cache 'a)  ; => 1
(lru-cache-keys cache)    ; => (a c b)

;; Adding a fourth entry evicts the LRU
(lru-cache-set! cache 'd 4)
(lru-cache-keys cache)        ; => (d a c)
(lru-cache-has-key? cache 'b) ; => #f

;; Using a thunk for cache-or-compute
(lru-cache-ref cache 'e
  (lambda () (+ 40 2)))   ; => 42

;; Memoisation
(define-memoised/lru (fib n)
  (printf "computing fib ~A~N" n)
  (cond
    ((= n 0) 1)
    ((= n 1) 1)
    (else (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2))))))

(fib 5)  ; prints "computing fib 5" .. "computing fib 0", returns 8
(fib 5)  ; returns 8, no printing
</enscript>

=== License

LGPL-3.0-or-later

=== Version history

; 0.1.0 : Initial release
